README.md, before:

Expresso Framework
---

> Self documented, self validated, typescript-first API framework written on top of Express

## Features
- Automatic input validation with [Zod](https://www.npmjs.com/package/zod)
- Type safe input and output
- Auto generated documentation

## Usage

### Defining an endpoint

Expresso router's main function is the `createEndpoint` function. This function is responsible for building the OpenAPI metadata that will be later used to generate the swagger ui documentation.

When creating an endpoint, you need to describe its input, output and give it at least one handler.

The `input` property is an object containing a `body`, `params` and / or `query` properties, each being a Zod schema. The corresponding `req` properties will be validated and transformed using these schemas.

The `output` property is an object literal having one property for each possible status code for that endpoint. Each status code receives a Zod schema describing the body of that response. The `res.json` typing will ensure that you fulfill at least one of the response bodies, but **will not** match the status code and body (this is a typing limitation and PRs are very welcome).

The `handlers` property is a function or array of optionally async functions. Errors and async errors are automatically captured and fed to `next`, so the express error handling flow works as normal.

Besides the `input`, `output` and `handlers` properties, you can also define a `description` property, which will be used to generate the OpenAPI documentation. All other OpenAPI properties for an endpoint are supported, but optional. We recommend using the `tags` property to group this endpoint with other similar ones. If you don't specify a `tags` property, the endpoint will be grouped with the default tag `"default"`.

You can see more about the OpenAPI specification at [https://swagger.io/](https://swagger.io/).

```typescript
import crypto from 'crypto'
import { z } from 'zod'
import { createEndpoint } from '@expresso/router'

export const createUser = createEndpoint({
  summary: 'Create a new user',
  description: 'If a user with that email already exists, the 409 response will be used. If that happens, you can resend this request with a new email to try again',
  tags: ['Users'],
  input: {
    body: z.object({
      name: z.string().min(1),
      email: z.string().email().min(1),
      password: z.string().min(16)
    })
  },
  output: {
    201: z.object({
      id: z.string().min(1),
      name: z.string().min(1),
      email: z.string().email().min(1)
    }),
    409: z.object({
      status: z.literal(409),
      message: z.string().min(1)
    })
  },
  handlers: (req, res) => {
    const { name, email } = req.body

    const id = crypto.randomBytes(16).toString('hex')

    res.status(201).json({
      id,
      name,
      email
    })
  }
})
```

### Defining routes

The routing object has the paths at its main level, with each path having properties for the HTTP methods they handle. The `Routing` type defines a routing object:

```typescript
import { createUser } from './endpoints/create-user.ts'
import { Routing } from '@expresso/router'

export const routing: Routing = {
  '/users': {
    post: createUser
  }
}
```

### Putting everything together

Now that you have your endpoints and routes, it's time to create the app. The `createApp` function runs an `express` server equipped with the routes and endpoints, plus a `GET /docs` endpoint which renders the swagger UI documentation.

In order to be able to generate an OpenAPI spec, we need more information about your app, in order to fill required fields in the documentation. More specifically, we need the `title`, `version` and `openapi` properties. All other properties are supported, but optional.

The result is an express app which you can use just like any other express app, including adding new routes, middlewares, error middlewares or starting a server with `app.listen()`.

You can specify your own app by passing a custom `app` property to the `createApp` options object. This is useful if you want to use your own express middlewares, or if you want to use a different version of express.

The `GET /docs` endpoint can be customized by passing a custom `docsEndpoint` property to `createApp`. You can also use the `swaggerUiOptions` property to customize the swagger UI.

```typescript
import { routing } from './routing.ts'
import { createApp, OpenApiInfo } from '../src'

const openApiInfo: OpenApiInfo = {
  info: {
    title: 'Test API',
    version: '1.0.0'
  },
  openapi: '3.0.1',
  servers: [{ url: 'http://localhost:3000' }]
}

const app = createApp({ openApiInfo, routing })

app.listen(3000, () => {
  console.log('Listening on 3000')
})
```

### /docs endpoint

This endpoint is used to render the swagger UI documentation. It is automatically generated by the `createApp` function.

This is the documentation generated by the code in the [usage](/usage) folder:

![example of swagger ui](docs/usage-swagger-docs.png)

Commit message:

doc: add documentation about new properties

README.md, after:

Expresso Framework
---

> Self documented, self validated, typescript-first API framework written on top of Express

## Features
- Automatic input validation with [Zod](https://www.npmjs.com/package/zod)
- Type safe input and output
- Auto generated documentation

## Usage

### Defining an endpoint

Expresso router's main function is the `createEndpoint` function. This function is responsible for building the OpenAPI metadata that will be later used to generate the swagger ui documentation.

When creating an endpoint, you need to describe its input, output and give it at least one handler.

The `input` property is an object containing a `body`, `params` and / or `query` properties, each being a Zod schema. The corresponding `req` properties will be validated and transformed using these schemas.

The `output` property is an object literal having one property for each possible status code for that endpoint. Each status code receives a Zod schema describing the body of that response. The `res.json` typing will ensure that you fulfill at least one of the response bodies, but **will not** match the status code and body (this is a typing limitation and PRs are very welcome).

The `handlers` property is a function or array of optionally async functions. Errors and async errors are automatically captured and fed to `next`, so the express error handling flow works as normal.

Besides the `input`, `output` and `handlers` properties, you can also define a `description` property, which will be used to generate the OpenAPI documentation. All other OpenAPI properties for an endpoint are supported, but optional. We recommend using the `tags` property to group this endpoint with other similar ones. If you don't specify a `tags` property, the endpoint will be grouped with the default tag `"default"`.

You can see more about the OpenAPI specification at [https://swagger.io/](https://swagger.io/).

```typescript
import crypto from 'crypto'
import { z } from 'zod'
import { createEndpoint } from '@expresso/router'

export const createUser = createEndpoint({
  summary: 'Create a new user',
  description: 'If a user with that email already exists, the 409 response will be used. If that happens, you can resend this request with a new email to try again',
  tags: ['Users'],
  input: {
    body: z.object({
      name: z.string().min(1),
      email: z.string().email().min(1),
      password: z.string().min(16)
    })
  },
  output: {
    201: z.object({
      id: z.string().min(1),
      name: z.string().min(1),
      email: z.string().email().min(1)
    }),
    409: z.object({
      status: z.literal(409),
      message: z.string().min(1)
    })
  },
  handlers: (req, res) => {
    const { name, email } = req.body

    const id = crypto.randomBytes(16).toString('hex')

    res.status(201).json({
      id,
      name,
      email
    })
  }
})
```

### Defining routes

The routing object has the paths at its main level, with each path having properties for the HTTP methods they handle. The `Routing` type defines a routing object:

```typescript
import { createUser } from './endpoints/create-user.ts'
import { Routing } from '@expresso/router'

export const routing: Routing = {
  '/users': {
    post: createUser
  }
}
```

### Putting everything together

Now that you have your endpoints and routes, it's time to create the app. The `createApp` function runs an `express` server equipped with the routes and endpoints, plus a `GET /docs` endpoint which renders the swagger UI documentation.

In order to be able to generate an OpenAPI spec, we need more information about your app, in order to fill required fields in the documentation. More specifically, we need the `title`, `version` and `openapi` properties. All other properties are supported, but optional.

The result is an express app which you can use just like any other express app, including adding new routes, middlewares, error middlewares or starting a server with `app.listen()`.

You can specify your own app by passing a custom `app` property to the `createApp` options object. This is useful if you want to use your own express middlewares, or if you want to use a different version of express.

The documentation can be customized via the `documentation` property, which accepts four optional properties, each one describing one manner of exposing documentation:

- `ui` (object): Generates the swagger UI documentation
  - `endpoint` (string): Endpoint through which swaggerUI will be available
  - `swaggerUiExpressOptions` (string): Options to be passed to swagguer-ui-express as-is
- `yaml` (boolean): Serves a yaml document containing the OpenAPI specification for the API in the `GET /swagger.yaml` endpoint
- `json` (boolean): Serves a json document containing the OpenAPI specification for the API in the `GET /swagger.json` endpoint
- `fs` (object): Saves the specification as a file in the given path
  - `path` (string): Path where the file should be saved (with file extension)
  - `format` (`'json'` | `'yaml'`): Specifies the format of the generated document

```typescript
import { routing } from './routing.ts'
import { createApp, OpenApiInfo } from '../src'

const openApiInfo: OpenApiInfo = {
  info: {
    title: 'Test API',
    version: '1.0.0'
  },
  openapi: '3.0.1',
  servers: [{ url: 'http://localhost:3000' }]
}

const app = createApp({
  openApiInfo,
  routing,
  documentation: {
    json: true,
    fs: {
      path: './docs/swagger.json',
      format: 'json'
    }
  }
})

app.listen(3000, () => {
  console.log('Listening on 3000')
})
```
